Add blog post about the supply chain. (#2)
CHERIoT-Platform/CHERIoT-Platform.github.io: _posts/2024-04-04-cheriot-supply-chain.markdown

---
layout: post
title:  "CHERIoT and the supply chain"
date:   2024-04-04T12:00+00:00
categories: rtos supply-chain auditing
author: "David Chisnall"
---

Late last week we learned that much of the world narrowly avoided a backdoor in SSH, introduced via the dependency on liblzma via libsystemd.
A malicious actor introduced a backdoor into liblzma, which could exploit SSH via this dependency chain (introduced by Linux distributions, not in the upstream OpenSSH).
This specific attack is not relevant to CHERIoT because it targets programs that have much bigger system requirements than the kinds of devices that we support, but the underlying concept is directly relevant.
This is precisely the category of attack that CHERIoT was designed to protect against.

## The origins of CHERI

As a compression library, the interface of something like liblzma is quite simple.

> You provide it with buffers to compress, it provides buffers to decompress.

Reviewer: Does it actually provide buffers or does the caller provide both in- and out-buffers?

It rapidly became apparent that it was not a good strategy because it meant that all code that touched an object had to be aware that the object might be shared.
Instead, we moved to the 'pure-capability' model, where every pointer was represented as a capability.
This involved orders of magnitude less porting effort and had the nice benefit of giving fine-grained memory safety for all objects.

It's worth remembering at this point that memory safety was never the goal of CHERI, it's just something that you need to be able to solve the real problems.
With object-granularity memory safety, you can build a linkage model that lets you link something like libz or liblzma and know that, at worst, it can tamper with the output buffers that you give it.
On a CHERI system, every pointer in the source language is lowered to a *CHERI capability*, an unforgeable hardware type that authorises access to memory and carries bounds and permissions.
You can think of a CHERI capability as a hardware-enforced pointer.
Every memory access (load, store, or jump) instruction takes a capability that authorises the operation as an operand.

> You can shrink the bounds or remove permissions to create new pointers with restricted rights, and that's a simple register-to-register operation.

Reviewer: The first two sentences here seem kind of out of order with respect to, or at least not immediately connected to, the next four.

> This is where the CHERIoT project started.
> We wanted to build a compartmentalisation model (and an associated programmer model) that can rely on CHERI existing and use this to build the kind of supply-chain security where you can fearlessly use third-party code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CHERIoT project builds atop this background.
We wanted to build a compartmentalisation model (and an associated programmer model)  for embedded systems that would allow us to address these supply-chain security concerns and fearlessly use third-party code.
The only presently viable foundational technology is CHERI, and so CHERIoT was born.
```

Although the rest of this post is specific to CHERIoT, many similar ideas can be applied on bigger CHERI systems such as Arm's Morello.

> The current CheriBSD release includes [support for library compartmentalisation](https://ctsrd-cheri.github.io/cheribsd-getting-started/features/c18n.html) and this is rapidly evolving.

Reviewer: Maybe "includes initial [support"?

> With CHERIoT, we wanted to showcase what's possible if you can assume CHERI everywhere.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CHERIoT showcases what's possible if you can assume CHERI everywhere.
```

In contrast, CheriBSD demonstrates how easy it is to incrementally adopt CHERI in environments with strong backwards compatibility requirements.

## The CHERIoT ABI introduces boundaries

UNIX originally did not have any notion of shared libraries.
When they were added, they replicated the model of static linkage as closely as possible.
Unlike MULTICS, where libraries could be isolated domains, shared libraries in UNIX all run in the same address space, with the same privileges.
The liblzma attack took advantage of this to redirect symbols from the main SSH executable into its own functions.

This kind of attack is not possible on the CHERIoT platform.

> The loader runs at startup (just as the run-time linker does on UNIX) but is protected.

Reviewer: Well, protection is one (true) thing, but it's more that there isn't an analogue of dynamic libraries and especially not IFUNCs in CHERIoT, right?

AIUI, it would, in principle, be possible to generate a compartment object file that exported symbols mangled as if they belonged to a different compartment and thereby cause the (static) linker to have to pick one (or complain), but that would leave traces in its audit log.

Author: I wrote a lot more about this and then deleted it.  There are really a few things here:

ifunc resolvers are (from rtld's perspective) untrusted code.  The liblzma attack didn't actually depend on ifunc except for phase ordering.  The fact that ssh was linked with BIND_NOW caused the ifunc resolver to run and the ifunc resolvers run from leaf to root in the library dependency tree.  This meant that the ifunc resolver ran *before* the RELRO things were mapped read-only.  The ifunc resolver then walked the loader's data structures to find the GOT entry for a *different* symbol and patched that.

The key thing here for us is the next line: we prevent this kind of thing by not running any untrusted code until we've thrown away all read-write capabilities to import tables.

Once untrusted code (i.e. anything other than the loader) is invoked, the compartment boundaries are in place.

CHERIoT provides two abstractions for code reuse; shared libraries and compartments.
Compartments are inspired by MULTICS libraries.
They have private code and globals and each introduces a new security context.
When you call a function that is exposed by a compartment, calling it involves a transition that prevents the callee and caller from seeing each other's data.
Only things explicitly passed as arguments or return values (or things reachable from them) are shared.

Shared libraries are similar to UNIX shared libraries in that they do not introduce a hard security boundary.
Functions exposed from shared libraries run in the context of their caller.
Shared libraries may contain code and read-only globals, but not mutable globals.

> Because they are immutable, this is equivalent of copying the code into the library into each compartment that calls it.

Reviewer: How would you feel about "largely" equivalent?  Fast unsealer 'n all that.

Arguments passed at compartment boundaries can be further restricted.
For example, in our network stack, the TLS compartment (BearSSL) asks the TCP/IP compartment to provide new plaintext data from a socket.
The TLS implementation reuses its own internal ring buffers for partial messages.

> Before passing a pointer to one of these to the TCP/IP layer, it removes all permissions except store and truncates the bounds to the available space.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before passing a pointer to one of these to the TCP/IP layer, it marks the pointer local, removes all permissions except store, and truncates the bounds to the available space.
```

Author: I think of global as a 'can-capture' permission on CHERIoT.  Without explaining the local-global thing here, I think that would confuse readers.

## Compartments can isolate state

A lot of compartments have state associated with callers.
For example, the socket API hands back sockets to the caller, the TLS compartment hands back TLS connection state.
CHERI provides a mechanism for this, which CHERIoT uses extensively, in the form of *sealing*.
You can think of sealed CHERI capabilities as hardware-enforced opaque types.
In C, you can return a `void*` or a pointer to a forward-declared `struct` from an API to signal that the caller shouldn't do anything with that pointer except hand it back.
This relies on trust: a caller can cast that pointer to some other type and dereference it.
A sealed CHERI capability, in contrast, can't be used or modified, except via a `cunseal` instruction.

The unsealing instruction requires a capability that matches the one used to seal the capability.
If they don't match (either because the unsealing capability is invalid, or because the opaque pointer is not of the correct type) then the operation returns an invalid capability.
This mechanism allows our TCP/IP compartment to hand out sealed capabilities to structures encapsulating socket state, for example.

> This sealed capability can be passed between compartments, so you can build structures where one compartment is allowed to create network connections but another is then able to send and receive over them, but they can't be forged.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This sealed capability can be passed between compartments, so you can build structures where one compartment is allowed to create network connections and another is then able to send and receive over them, but they can't be forged.
```
I also had a minor difficulty parsing this sentence: what does 'they' refer to? I think it is 'network connections', but it might be better to be explicit.

Author: Split into several (hopefully?) less confusing sentences.

When you pass any pointer to the send or receive function, the TCP/IP stack has a hardware-backed guarantee that this really is a valid socket object.

This mechanism is important for building rich compartmentalised interfaces because it allows sharing rich types with untrusted entities.
Conventional operating systems typically provide an abstraction like file descriptors or handles to expose opaque types to userspace.

> These can be opaque integers the are looked up in some in-kernel structure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These can be opaque integers that are looked up in some in-kernel structure.
```

This works because there is a single kernel and it can have a separate table per userspace process.
CHERI's sealing mechanism makes this work between multiple compartments with mutual distrust.

> For example, consider the TLS and TCP/IP compartments.

Reviewer 2: Include link to previous blog post?

The TLS stack also wants to be able to guarantee that the owner of a TLS session can ask it to send data, but the caller can't send unencrypted data over the same socket.
The sealing mechanism on top of a compartmentalisation model enables all of these use cases.

In particular, all state associated with a TLS session is in an object that, between calls to the TLS connection, is reachable *only* by the sealed capability.
This means that a compromise in the TLS compartment cannot affect other TLS sessions without a lot of work by the attacker.

On CHERIoT, we also have a notion of static sealed objects.
These are like global variables but where the owning compartment does not have access to the object, only to a sealed capability (opaque pointer) to them.
These are used to bootstrap various things.
For example, if you want to allocate memory then you must present an allocator capability to the allocator compartment.
This contains the quota that determines the maximum amount that you can allocate.
Similarly, to create a network connection you must present the network API compartment with a sealed capability authorising you to connect to a particular host.

> The core of the RTOS uses sealing to remove the scheduler from the trusted computing base (TCB) for confidentiality and integrity.

Reviewer 2: Include link to previous blog or RTOS docs to explain this?

A useful compartment needs to export at least one entry point and typically import entry points from other compartments.

To be able to invoke any entry point in another compartment, the loader must give the compartment a sealed capability for that entry point.
For library calls, this is also true, though with a special kind of sealed capability that the hardware unsealed on a jump (a sealed entry, or 'sentry' capability).

The loader will provision capabilities to compartments based on metadata filled in by the linker.
This means that the linker knows (among other things), for every compartment:

 - What entry points it exposes.
 - Which of those entry points run with interrupts enabled or disabled.
 - Which entry points in other compartments (or libraries) it calls.
 - What static sealed objects does it have (including the contents of those objects and which compartment owns the capability that authorises unsealing them).
 - What the exact contents of the code is for each compartment.
 - Which memory-mapped I/O (MMIO) regions it can access.

If the linker doesn't know one of these things, it can't tell the loader to provide the capabilities that authorise it.

> CHERI systems fail closed: if you don't have a capability that authorises a thing, you cannot do the thing.

Reviewer 2: This sentence seems like a bit of a non-sequitur. I think it does make sense but it took me a second to figure out the context.

---
layout: post
title:  "CHERIoT and the supply chain"
date:   2024-04-04T12:00+00:00
categories: rtos supply-chain auditing
author: "David Chisnall"
---

Late last week we learned that much of the world narrowly avoided a backdoor in SSH, introduced via the dependency on liblzma via libsystemd.
A malicious actor introduced a backdoor into liblzma, which could exploit SSH via this dependency chain (introduced by Linux distributions, not in the upstream OpenSSH).
This specific attack is not relevant to CHERIoT because it targets programs that have much bigger system requirements than the kinds of devices that we support, but the underlying concept is directly relevant.
This is precisely the category of attack that CHERIoT was designed to protect against.

CHERIoT provides tools at various layers to reduce the risk of this kind of attack.
Enabling fearless code reuse is one of our principle goals.

> This doesn't just mean mitigating accidental bugs from memory safety errors in C/C++, it means ensuring that even an active attacker in the supply chain can do a limited amount of damage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This doesn't just mean mitigating accidental bugs from memory safety errors in C/C++, it means ensuring that even an active attacker in the supply chain is limited in the amount of damage they can do.
```

Reviewer 2: Either this or 'can only do'.
